The Joe Rogan.
Experience. Thanks for inviting me. This is awesome. I I've.
Seen a bunch of videos online of you talking about space and your, your,
your dream of being an astronaut as a young man. And what,
what is it like just to see the earth from above and to be you lived up
there for like what, 95 days.
95 Days, which actually is kind of a bummer, to be honest with you because, uh,
you know, this, if you saw that video maybe, but yeah, the thing is,
if you stay for a hundred days, they give you a patch. Right?
And I I'm a day 95 and the space shuttle discovery shows up to bring me home.
And Mark Kelly was a commander. He goes, Garrett,
it's time to hop in and come home. And I'm like, man,
I just need five more days. <laugh> to.
Get that patch. Can't.
We just like go around a few more times or something and it'll work.
It seems like 95 days should be enough, man. Give them man a patch. Right.
Right. You know, how much does a patch cost? What's the.
Longest anybody stayed up there?
The longest, um, for an American was Scott Kelly's, uh,
nearly a year in spaces, longest, uh, in, in, in a row basically. Uh,
but it is a Russian, uh, that stayed up there for longer than a year.
And he has the all time record.
How, and, and they, when they come back, like what,
what is 90 days like coming back?
Because I've talked to people who've gone there when they come back,
their balance is all off. The equiliums all.
Screwing. You're kind of, it is,
you're kind of messed up and in your vestibular system is what's affected the
most, at least that's what's most noticeable when you first get back. Um,
actually the first thing I noticed, let me back up is, uh,
how heavy things were again, you know,
so like I took off my helmet and I was holding it in my hand.
And if felt like I was holding the anchor to the USS nimittz, you know, <laugh>,
it's like, I'm like, how am I ever gonna brush my teeth?
It'd be like too arduous. You know, does.
Your body severely weaken in 95 days? Well.
Back in the day, back when I was going there. So that mission, my,
my long term mission was back in, uh, 2008.
And back then we were still losing bone and muscle mass. Uh,
as we're going up there along about, you lost about 1% of bone every month.
So that was about 3% low. They don't anymore. They don't anymore.
Cause we found out we,
we came up with better countermeasures to prevent that what are the
countermeasures it's basically working out. Oh, uh,
and it's resistive exercise that, that does it for you,
which we knew back when I was going. But the problem was we had a, a, uh,
we had this machine that was kind of a, um,
a first generation of the workout machine. And it could do large reps, but,
but low load. So you're doing like a lot of reps at, at, at low weight.
And, and that helped. But, but what helps it turns out we didn't,
we found this out could kinded by happenstance, but it turns out that high load,
low reps works much better. Mm.
And so we got this new machine that you could really crank it up to 11.
And the guys now that are,
that are working out on that thing are coming home with no muscle muscle or,
or bone loss at.
All. Wow. That's that's.
Because who, who what's the Canadian gentleman that we had on Chris Hatfield?
Yes. Chris Hatfield. When, when commander Hatfield came back, he,
I believe he said it took him a whole year to recover. Yeah. I mean,
that was still like in the early, still kind of in the early days. So he, he,
I don't know which machine he used.
He probably did use a new one <affirmative> but overall it does take to get
everything back to get your full vestibular system back.
Your sense of balance to get your, all your bone,
all your muscle back to baseline. It took me a year to get all that back too.
Wow. It's kind of like rehabbing from a major sports injury.
That's gotta be so strange that your,
your body just wants to shriivevel up when you're up there because there's no
gravity.
Yeah. It's really interesting. Cuz you're, it's, it's an adaptation and the,
and the body is, is incredible. So what it's doing is it's realizing, Hey,
you know, I don't have to carry my own weight anymore.
<laugh> so why do I need this big bulky skeleton? Oh wow. It's like,
you're becoming kind of like a fish where you're, you're just,
you're shedding all the bone density, uh, because you don't have to your,
your body realizes I don't need it. I it's like a, it's like a fish and water,
you know, that have fish have very slender bones. Yeah.
So that's an interesting way to look at it. Like a fish. Yeah.
Wow. And we fight it by working out.
And how often do you have to work out every day? Every day. Every day.
How often? Like how much time they theyschedule.
Hours? No, you're not on the machine for two hours. So that's also prepping,
you know, you getting changed and uh, you know, clean it up afterwards. But um,
so you're working a good hour every day. What is.
It like a sweat and space.
It's weird because <laugh>, cause what happens is, uh,
if you don't notice if like in the beginning you don't even realize it,
but it's all building up <affirmative> and even without like, if,
if you have no hair to soak it up,
it just builds up like this thin film of water on your head,
like a coating of water. Oh.
And you don't even notice it cause it doesn't run down and then,
and then somebody calls your name and you're like, yeah. And then psh.
<Laugh> it's like, <laugh> oh, that's crazy. I never even thought of that.
So it just kind of floats off your yeah.
It's like a dog shaking itself, you know? And it just goes everywhere and.
It's so if you have it on your arm, you can kind of just go sh and the, the,
the sweat' will go flying.
You know, your crewmates won't be too happy with you. You can do this a lot,
but yeah.
Wow. Oh, that's is there video of people doing that in space? There's.
Gotta be, there should be, we we've shot so much video.
Somebody's gotta have done that, but.
So are you basically doing like compound movements,
like dead lifts and squats and things along those lines?
Yeah. Functional fitness kind of stuff. Uh, where, um, but,
and you're focusing on certain areas.
So the bone loss comes mostly from your legs. Oh. Because you're not loading.
So, so basically our bones, um, need a stimulus, uh, uh,
to regenerate and it happens to us every day.
So you walk as you go upstairs that load, that the bones feel,
the compressive load is telling the bone, Hey, make some more, mm.
Now you take that away. And the bone stops making more. And that's the problem.
People say like, can't you just like, like calcium pills, but it's not a,
a mineral deficiency. It's just a load. It's no load.
That's interesting that the body adapts so quickly. Yeah. That 90 days has such.
And if you didn't do anything for 90 days at all, you'd be in real trouble.
Right? Yeah. That's, what's really kind of freaky is thinking about like, well,
what if we don't fight this?
Because all these adaptations should go through are not,
not a problem when you're in space. It's only a problem.
If you want to come home. Right. Right. Losing that bone. Um,
even like not using your vestibular organs anymore, your semicircular canals,
your odolith organs, you're not making use of those for your balance.
You're just going, purely on the visual.
What that does initially is to make you kind of sick. You get kind of,
it's like being air sick or seasick, but once your body adapts, you're fine.
So the question is like, what would we become if we didn't fight it?
What if we just went with it and stayed up? There'd feel like a water.
Balloon. <laugh> what would you become? Right.
You'd become actually the, the place I think in science fiction,
that gets it the most. Correct. Is if you watch the, the band,
you ever watch that show.
No, I heard it's a really good show. I never got into.
It though. It's good. And, and, and they get it right?
Because they show people like these belters that live in partial gravity,
like their whole lives. And they have much, Slen more slender bones. Oh.
And like, they catch this like terrorist guy and they want to torture him.
And all they do is they make 'em stand up in gravity and on earth.
And at it's incredibly painful for him. And I'm like, oh, wow. Yeah,
that would probably be.
What would happen. And it must take a long time to get everything back.
If you went from earth gravity to the space station and you lived up
there for a year and didn't do anything about it and then came back to earth.
I mean, you'd basically be like, it would be hard to crawl, right? Yeah.
You, you would, your, your, um, all, all your, if you don't try to fight it,
um, you, you, you,
the vestibular stuff would come back probably about the same rate,
but you would be really hurting with your muscle atrophy and your bone.
So you would,
you would lose a lot of your skeleton if you're up there for a year and did
nothing. And you would also your, your, all your muscles that you don't use,
like in your legs and your postal muscles. So in your lower back,
you're not using those anymore.
So they would just like waste a weight to nothing. You'd be okay in your arms,
cuz you're doing everything. You're everything you do is with your arms.
That's how you move. That's how you get around is by pulling and pushing.
But you don't, you don't, there's no walk in. There's no stairs.
There's nothing. Does it affect.
The way you think at all?
You know, some, some people describe a, a kind of a,
an issue with short term memory, they call it like spacebra <laugh> and.
Boy,
is that a small group of people that would understand what you're talking about
there? Oh, I got space brain, bro. I got that too. Oh yeah.
<Laugh> so it it's, uh, something that, um, I,
I never really noticed it, but um,
I don't know how much of that is real and how much results, like,
like you're freaking out cuz you're in space. Right.
So it's distracting and maybe you forget like what that number was you' were
supposed to remember, but mm. You know,
like if you're really in the middle of something and,
and you're all excited and, or, uh, and, and,
and you kind of can't remember somebody's phone number. It's kind of like,
kind of like that. Oh, okay.
So it's just, well, I would imagine that just being up there,
breathing that recirculted, air's gotta be odd, right?
Yeah. And it might stink,
but I don't know because the other thing that happens is you have this big fluid
shift.
So right now we have a lot of blood pulling up in our legs and our,
our heart it's most important job of course,
is to feed the brain oxygenated blood.
And then when you take the gravity vector out of the picture,
the heart sends too much up to the brain and the stuff doesn't collect the,
in our legs anymore.
And it all shoots up here and you get the shift of all that blood volume to your
upper body and your head gets all puffed up. Whoa. Yeah. Like my,
so my first night in space, I, I, uh, went to sleep,
which was kind of hard to do, cuz you're in space.
You don't want to go to sleep. Right. Yeah. Um, and on that first night,
um, I, I woke up in the middle of the night and I could have sworn,
I was standing on my head doing a headstand or a handstand. I'm like,
why am I up standing on my head in my sleep? This is strange. Right.
And then I looked out the window, I saw the earth and I'm like, oh,
that's right. I'm in space. <laugh> like.
So all the blood was just kind of pooling in your head. Yeah.
As if you were like hanging by gravity boots or.
Something, it, it feels exactly like that. Wow. And then after a day or two,
you get used to it and it doesn't bother you anymore,
but you feel congested cuz you still have all this volume up here.
So your sense of smell and your sense of taste are all deaded. Oh wow.
It's kind of like, yeah. So it's kind of like when you have a cold and you,
and your sense of own, your sense of taste are like not as strong.
So it's like that all the time. That's why we take, we, we cover,
we have every hot sauce known to, to humankind up on the space station.
Oh really? Like sracha we got, uh, you know,
Louisiana can fire sauce and all, whatever.
We got like a whole stockpile of it because you, you pour that on every thing.
So you can get some taste cuz otherwise everything tastes really bland. Oh wow.
Now.
What are you eating up.
There? Oh, it's terrible. <laugh> <laugh>.
Is it freeze? Drieded foods mostly.
Or Mo yeah. You don't go for the food. All right.
There's not like a foody holiday. <laugh> you know, it's like, uh,
so you get basically two choices. You have the American food,
which is essentially mrres like military freeze dried or radiated, uh,
you know, infinite shelf, life kind of stuff. And uh,
and then the Russian food is also based on their militaryrations,
but from submarines and the, and the Russian food actually tastes better.
But the problem is one of, because it comes in cans.
So you get these, these cans. And even though it tastes good,
you open that can up and you look at it and it's like, God,
it looks like dog food.
<Laugh> there's like congealed and yeah, but it tastes better taste. It,
it tastes.
Better. Uh, but it's just like, so unappetizing,
when you open that can up and you know, it's just not.
Does what, what would happen if you brought fresh things up there, would they,
would they rot at the same rate that they would rot in America?
Yeah. The only the thing is, um, we have no refrigeration. Oh we didn't.
When I was there, they actually have a small refrigerator now.
So you can't have anything that, that needs to be refrigerated,
but you would usually like for the first couple days we'd take a bag of fresh
food and we took like sandwiches and, and, and uh,
fruits and vegetables and stuff. And then,
cause that's the last time you're gonna have it. After that,
it's all gonna be this, this stuff. And the pack it's that you add water to.